This is Michael Kaburas with Spir. So,
welcome everybody to our ongoing
conversation
um where I've got the great honor to
spend a little bit more time with this
remarkable human being explorer mystic
Chris Bash and to unpack some of the
aspects of his journey that we didn't
really get a chance to finish in round
one. Um, so I'll reiterate just a quick
bio for Chris and then we'll jump into
the deep end again. Uh, Chris is a
philosopher and professor emeritus of
religious studies who over a 20-year
period beginning in 1979
participated in 73 carefully structured
highdosese LSD sessions in a therapeutic
setting. and he later wrote about all of
this in his book LSD in the mind of the
universe which we've just finished
reading in uh the Spir book club. So
Chris, welcome back. Thank you again for
your generosity and yeah, just from the
outset, deep gratitude for you. Thank
you.
>> Thank you, Michael. It's very kind of
you and I really enjoy our
conversations. So
>> yeah, well it's it's great to have this
opportunity again. There's a lot of
jumping off points. Um from our last
chat uh there are a number of questions
we ran out of time on we couldn't cover.
It includes uh non-human intelligence uh
AI and consciousness uh more
philosophical questions on the illusion
of separation the problem of suffering.
Um, but what I thought we could explore
as I went through my wish list, um, of
which there are many, was to start with
the impossible question because it
probably has the most interesting twists
and turns.
Um, and this is the this is the question
uh on the nature of reality as it
relates to love and suffering.
And um maybe that to to have this
discussion and before we jump into the
question itself, it's worth framing a
few things. Um one that
the nature of reality is really littered
with paradoxes. So and one thing about a
paradox is really only appears when
we're not looking at something
holistically or from the right
viewpoint. So many of these tensions
that we're going to be discussing
obviously resolve at a higher level of
awareness and through different forms of
knowing. So the first thing I want to
point out is I think just paying respect
to those different forms of knowing.
There's an intellectual knowing but
there are a host of other
>> other forms embodiment and heart and
participatory knowing. And um I just
want to call out the fact that um
language is really only going to go so
far in in trying to to describe and and
solve some of these things. Um
so and probably will do a poor job at at
describing the divine, but it doesn't
mean we shouldn't try and wrestle with
it. Um
>> and second that the um the concepts of
of time and space or the linear sequence
of of events again becomes less obvious
at higher levels of reality. Um and that
that example of something fundamental in
our world which is linear time um is is
is one of those things that um um an
example of something that's you know
will dissolve really when we're when
we're not in this realm. Um, yeah. And
then the third thing I might point out
is the paradox of separateness or the
illusion of separateness where there's
clearly
>> a oneness of all things, but there's
also this separate
>> manifestation of that oneness that's
also just as precious. So there's this
Chris and there's this Michael and here
we are.
>> Yeah,
>> we're having this discussion and
>> um so
I want to be mindful of the sort of the
artificial constraints that my question
implies, but
>> I still want to try to tackle it
honestly.
Um
so maybe with that as a bit of
background um
and before we we we jump into the
question of suffering maybe I'll start
by making reference to some of the aims
that that are at the core I think of
your worldview and these are um these
are some of the actions at the core of
the perennial traditions that
consciousness is fundamental that love
is intrinsic to reality that love is
fundamental
And that essentially at the most
fundamental level these these are the
same things and you can point to
something like the vidantic um tradition
such an under existence consciousness
bliss or or just this idea that love is
at the beginning of all things.
>> Yeah.
>> And um maybe before we pose the question
of suffering can I ask your view on
these actions like do you think about
the nature of reality this way?
>> Yeah. Well, you know, you're asking deep
wide questions which are really good
questions. And so, let me start with a u
just a
a restriction in that I don't pretend to
have all the answers to the whole breath
and depth of of the universe. I mean, it
would be impossible. So, I want to be
careful to qualify anything I say. I may
have a little wider perspective because
of my psychedelic work. Uh but that
doesn't mean um
the breadth of my perspective is
commensurate with the breadth of the
universe itself. So I think we're at a
very early stage in human evolution in
the evolution of the universe and our
knowledge is limited. Uh in a million
years we're going to know much more than
we know now. And so um I don't that this
a fallacy of generalization of expertise
and I don't want to commit that fallacy.
So I just would like your uh viewers to
understand that anything I say is my
best attempt to make sense of these
questions in the context of my
psychedelic experience. But that's a
limited
as wide as it is. It's still a limited
perspective.
So um do I think about the the ultimate
nature of reality?
Actually not very much. I mean honest uh
having tasted it, having tasted
something of it, having lived it, I live
with a deep appreciation
of reality, but I don't think of it
except when I'm asked questions like
you're asking now to to ponder it. I
mean, I I thought about it a lot in
writing the book, and I've done my best
to sort of marshall all the experiential
uh insights that I was given around the
nature of reality. But I think you're
right, the the perennial tradition rings
true to me, as long as we remember that
just as there are perennial truths,
there are all are also perennial lies.
And I think that's something that the
perennial tradition has tended to
underemphasize.
For example, uh the perennial truths
would include um the unitive nature of
all reality ultimately. Um the
fundamental quality of love which is
derivative from the quality of oneness.
Uh that these thoughts uh that the the
self exists eternally cannot does not
die when the body dies. Um all these are
general they keep showing up uh in
cultures around the world. But there are
fundamental lies too that for example
women are spiritually inferior to men.
That's a perennial lie. And that nature
is inferior to spirit.
>> That's another perennial lie. Uh so
with that qualification, yeah, I think
insights from the perennial tradition
ring true.
uh the Hindu tradition says God did not
so much create the world as God became
the world through this process of
emanation and unfolding. And I think
that's that's a basically true insight
that rings true for my experience of the
world in the peak experiences
that it is the manifestation
the emanation of a un unbelievably
complex
intelligent
gracious uh I qualify gracious but um
being that it manifests as the world. So
the for me the body the universe is the
body of the divine or whatever you want
to use to describe this
unimaginably complex and subtle
phenomenon of the consciousness that
lies behind the manifestation of the
universe.
>> Yeah. And and Chris, I thanks for making
that disclaimer and I think that's
exactly why you're the perfect person to
be discussing this because you know this
is this is I I don't mean for this to be
sort of a a list of questions or an
interrogation. It's really something
that I feel is an underserved area of
discussion between between people that
um that have experienced um this
paradox. On one hand, conviction in in
in is clearly an intelligence. There's
and and then when you're in contact or
in communion with it, there's clearly a
a general ground of okayness as if all
of all is perfection. There's nothing
that needs to be fixed. But then coming
back to this realm, there are severe
inconsistencies.
>> Everything needs to be fixed.
>> Yeah. Everything needs to be fixed. and
and um and and this is this is where you
know I think um the quite possibly the
biggest inconsistency is this question
of unnecessary suffering.
>> I think we should be clear when we
describe what we mean when we say
unnecessary suffering because to me I'm
talking about things that are absurd
>> like it's not suffering that builds
character.
>> It's it's the kind with no redemptive
arc. There's no visible
>> no redemptive arc. Yeah. And I think
with this stuff
>> Yeah. Sorry to go ahead.
>> And suffering that goes beyond human
foibables. I mean suffering that is
built into the fabric of nature as it
currently exists. Yeah.
>> Yeah. Yeah. It's not limited to um um
it's not confined to human suffering. It
extends to nature.
>> Um and so um the perennial traditions
and others of course try to account for
it
>> but I feel like the reality of it is
sort of underserved. it's not given its
due consideration and
>> like some examples of that are you know
the vidantic traditions talk of Leela
like the illusion the play like from the
perspective of the absolute nothing is
actually happening
>> and you know while I understand it from
one viewpoint it's not the only
viewpoint
>> and for many it's not even a viewpoint
that's accessible
>> um and you know there are others there's
>> all sorts of perennial traditions talk
of withdrawal the the cabala talks of
God withdrawing to make room for
creation and divinity stepping back and
allowing for free will for whatever to
emerge
>> and then they embrace the paradox that
this withdrawal is somehow still God.
>> Um yeah,
>> but I think these things really only
relocate the problem at this realm.
>> Yeah, I think you're right. They just
relocate it.
>> They don't solve it.
>> Yeah. And and and I'm not in any way
suggesting that we can solve the
problem. I'll go to my grave without
solving it. for sure.
>> Yeah.
>> So the point of asking you is not to um
>> is not to to get an answer really or to
even interrogate um your experience from
the point of view of what truths can we
can we surface from that but rather from
the point of view of you know um
putting aside that you're
the OG psychonaut who's gone to the ends
of reality and kind of come back to tell
the story. I think you're one of the
very few people that I've come across
that talk with conviction
about your the experiential nature
you've had of suffering contained within
this divinity of being. And you talk
about it in your book. Um, and that's
that's one of the things that that that
um has caused me to to want to want to
drill down on this question with you.
>> Okay?
>> You know, because I find very few people
that live with that conviction and talk
to it. I can I can sniff out those that
don't have that talk to it but don't
have the conviction, right? Because
they're a dime a dozen, right? They've
read a book and they're,
>> you know, they take it from the zoomed
out level.
>> Uh, and I myself in my own way have
experienced the the uh resolution of
this paradox at higher levels of
awareness.
>> Yeah.
>> But those that live it and then have
conviction are very few. So So the
impossible question. So if if all is
divine all, how can this gratuitous
suffering possibly be part of this
allloving reality? That's the question.
>> Yeah.
Well, let's begin with the understanding
that if there if all is the divine
and I whenever I use the term divine, we
have to apply all sorts of
qualifications to to disassociate it
from theism and the limitations of the
religious conceptions of God and
whatnot. So we'll let the word divine re
be a tagline for this infinite majesty
or infinite mystery of the source of all
existence that manifests as existence.
So if everything is the divine that
means that the divine experiences the
suffering that is inherent in the
universe itself. So the divine isn't
standing back and letting us experience
the suffering but the divine is a
co-articipant and itself experiences the
suffering. Okay. So that's just a
starting point. Um there had been times
in my sessions where I was experiencing
great pain kind of the pain of that
stretches across the breath the breath
of humanity
and eventually
uh feeling a sense of I'm responsible
for this but the eye is not Chris Bash
who's responsible for suffering but the
eye as the divine self as a fractal
manifestation of the divine
that the divine I am responsible for the
suffering. I'm responsible. I caused all
these worlds to come into being. I set
this in motion.
And this reminds me of that passage from
Isaiah where Yahweh says, "I am Yahweh.
I am the source of good and evil alike."
That just driving it home. So we have to
look to the primary source of reality if
we're going to address in any deep way
um the nature of suffering. And as I
mentioned before to me the closest I've
been able to make sense of this hinges
on the incompleteness
of the human condition and the
incompleteness of the universe that and
of course the issue of suffering runs
far far wider than the human species. It
runs throughout all the species. All of
whom suffer. All of whom experience
death and you know peacemeal life. All
of whom are dealing with incomplete and
and sort of half complete evolutionary
forms of their body consciousness.
It really comes down to the question,
why would an infinitely perfect
blissful
being consciousness manifest such a
profoundly?
Why would the why would it manifest a
universe at all knowing that the
universe is going to unfold over
billions and billions of years with all
these incompletenesses and all this
suffering inherent? Yeah, I like to
think would would a would a mother give
birth to a child, you know, and and and
sort of um
>> Yeah.
>> You know, affect these things on them.
>> Yeah. And in a short frame of reference,
of course, we would scream, "No, no
mother would ever do that intentionally
to a child." But again, we have to we
have to step away from our short-term
perspective into a very, very long
perspective. I mean, we could sort of
say,
why would we submit a six-year-old to
the things we submit them to in the
first grade? In a short-term
perspective, that makes no sense
whatsoever. Unless we understand that
they are growing eventually to do
graduate work in medicine. or why would
you submit yourself to organic chemistry
as a freshman in college unless you
contextualize that with wanting to do
medicine eventually in medical school
and after medical school. So we have to
sort of stretch out profoundly the the
breath of our framework. And so the
question of suffering really kind of
revolves boils down to the question um
why creation at all knowing that
creation is going to involve so many
generations of suffering. Why creation
at all?
>> Yes.
>> And um when this was posed as a question
in my sessions, it was posed two times.
Um
the intelligence that was posing the
question said have we not learned
anything? Was it all for not? Have we
not learned anything with this
incompleteness? And in that moment the
manifestation of existence seemed to be
part of the process of the divine
knowing itself which doesn't excuse it
from the suffering it's caused. And I
actually don't think that's an adequate
um cosmology to think it's all about the
self- knowing of the one manifesting as
the many. Uh because when you experience
the exquisite
fullness of the one,
it's hard to imagine exactly the kind of
deficit that would generate the
manifestation of the of creation as an
attempt to know itself. I mean, can't it
know itself in potential rather than in
manifestation? Indeed,
>> I have I am more attracted to the
thought that in some fundamental way
this unitive consciousness is sharing
its being is is basically creating a
circumstance in which it can manifest
itself in fractal forms in individual
forms and then allow these individual
forms to grow and to actualize the
potential which is inherent within all
divine structures actualizing that de
potential in higher and higher forms and
I mean like starting with grasses
through vascular development in trees
and plants through the development of
mobility and consciousness that moves in
animals to self-consciousness in some
higher species you dolphins and human
beings and whatnot to a reincarnation
that's evolving more and more capacities
over countless cycles of reincarnation I
think of it more in terms of a desire to
share its existence. So in that context,
the opportunity that human beings have
is to become gods. And I mean that not
in a either in an an overestimating
sense or in an underestimating sense. a
desire and a capacity to become creators
>> of their existence in a profound way and
to be able to create exquisite bliss
in physical existence in ways that are
hard to even imagine short of science
fiction right now.
And if we imagine that as a goal, that
as a possibility of being able to
literally
as fractal embodiment of the sparks of
consciousness to manifest a profound
harmony in our body, harmony in our
situation, in our in our physical world,
harmony within our consciousness, within
our mind and heart.
Then all steps leading to that, having
to work through all the animal
beastiality that's part of our
evolutionary heritage, working through
that, working through the lower drives,
evolving into compassion, evolving into
service, evolving into creativity,
evolving into mystical awareness, and
then the fruition of mystical awareness
within the body and within our lifetime,
within our lifestyle.
Then maybe
maybe just maybe the pain of human
suffering begins to take on a meaning
in terms of contributing to the larger
developmental project of a fruition that
is so far beyond
our ability to envision right now from
within the fragmented condition
that we don't even think about it very
much. We don't see it in the religious
literature. We see it when it's applied
to individuals that there can be an
individual mystical awakening or an
individual fruition of the divine
consciousness.
But it hasn't been applied to the human
species as a totality. And yet it must
because the divine doesn't think in
terms of indivi, you know, it doesn't
think in small terms. It's only
concerned with the evolution of large
structures, planetary structures,
galactic structures, species structures.
So I think the development that we have
to envision is what it would be like for
an entire species to reach a level of
spiritual realization
that is had been known previously only
to the highest levels of mystics in
history. And I'm not talking about
simply,
you know, early stages of mystical
development, but high stages of mystical
development where we're talking about
beings who are often called mahasidas.
Not a sitta is an enlightened being, but
a mahasida is a great enlightened being.
So that it's just not not just an
awakening of their consciousness, but
awakening of a control of physical
reality through this awakened
consciousness. What would an entire
species be like
who had this now as their baseline
consciousness
and would that be worth all the pain and
suffering that we've experienced along
the way? Even so,
when we look at so much of the suffering
that you're referring to, it seems to be
embedded in nature itself. These are you
know these are genetic
genetic anomalies that can't be traced
to any particular human failing in any
imagination.
But then nature itself is incomplete in
this way.
Evolution is a messy business. Nature is
incomplete. Do we choose to be the
question I think becomes did we have a
choice to participate in this messiness
of creation or didn't we and I generally
tend to side with those who thinks we
have a choice that we're not victims
here we're not comp our existence here
is not compulsory
that we have a choice whether to
participate in spacetime
knowing that spacetime is the messy
business that it is in its developmental
process. And someone like Robert Monroe,
I think in his work, his out of body
work, he certainly suggests that we all
have choices. We had a spiritual
existence before we came uh to
participate in earthly incarnations.
He says
that the reason we came and incarnated
in earth is because somewhere in our
travels in spiritual or extraysical
reality, we came upon a graduate of the
Earth school. He says,
>> "And the quality of that energy of that
being was so extraordinary
that we chose to do whatever is
necessary in order to realize that
energy within ourselves. And that energy
is something which is born into the very
very intense accelerated evolutionary
conditions of existing inside time and
space.
>> Okay.
>> Yeah.
>> So yeah.
>> Yeah. Well, there's there's so much
there. Um,
>> I I love this um this this way that you
put it um of the divine wanting to share
the divinity, multiply the divinity
>> um through through us.
>> Uh and it brings up I think the question
of
it does well it brings up the question
of free will but also the illusion of
separateness. I think there's some sense
that
when we transcend from this realm
there's less individuation. there's less
sense of a free will. There's there's
there's no time. Um, so there's some
reason
>> I don't agree with you there, but keep
going. We'll come back.
>> Yeah, I maybe I shouldn't say like
>> yeah,
>> a horrible generalization to say that,
but these are some of the things that
that you may sense
>> at higher levels of awareness and um but
but in any sense, they all point to
>> there's a reason we're living here in
this realm, in this dimension where we
can exhibit free will. Um,
>> yeah,
>> like there's a reason for it. There's
this other dimension outside of unity
consciousness, which is like you said, a
quest for experience or a quest for
knowledge or a quest for choice or
>> um
>> something there's something here that's
important and there's a reason for it
and and like it's undeniable. Um, and I
like I like the uh um I like the context
you you put it you put it in that that
it's it's through a an overarching
desire to share that divinity and
multiply that divinity that this
individuation would would happen. Um it
calls to it it makes me think of other
ways to think about the nature of
reality. uh one um the perennial you
know sense is very much that there's
this there's this love that's the
fundamental ground we fell from that
unity or we we we moved away from that
unity we're coming back to it and sort
of there's this distortion that's
between but what's real is that um but
then there's also this other possibility
that that this evolutionary spirituality
or this evolution of process philosophy
which is that love itself might be
something that we're we're gradually
evolving towards, we're gradually
becoming. Um, which to me in my own
limited experiences
is a contrast with what I've experienced
with what I've what I've touched, what I
know, not at the intellectual level, but
at much deeper levels of knowing.
>> Um, but I'm curious
>> say more about that a contrast to your
experience. So there is, you know, when
I have had when I've been blessed with
this sort of glimpse of of of a higher
reality, um there's a general
undercurrent of
just okayness. It's it's there's there's
something that we are that's
unshakably okay.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. It's it's it's it's not there's no
you don't think about things the way I'm
thinking about them in this
conversation. Right? There's trying we
don't there's no need to try to resolve
this paradox at that level. And um
>> and and so that um experiential
understanding
which has a perfume. that sort of lasts
for a while
>> and then as we get more um more
integrated with this realm
>> I sort of you know I lose the a little
bit lose the access to it or lose the
the gravity of it
>> and and and the the left you left brain
starts to take over a bit more.
>> Um but also the quest for um marrying
these tensions into these tensions in
this realm feels to me like
like it shouldn't be shunned. You know,
it feels to me like a like a um a worthy
pursuit even if there's no answer, you
know, at least for the very for at least
for the um for the goal of sharpening my
relationship, me being this
individuation of unity consciousness,
this very specific one of one which will
never exist again after I pass. at least
for the purposes of sharpening this
relationship with the divine. You know,
I feel like it's a worthy pursuit. So
that that's what I mean by
>> um by that. Yeah.
>> Let's use the terms maybe introduce the
terms the distinction between being and
becoming you know not to do it trivially
but I think in some ways that language
helps us frame what you're saying. And I
agree with what you're saying that when
we're in an a relaxed state of
consciousness through meditation or
through psychedelics, we are more we
come into the field of being
and and in that state of being we know
that everything is all right. Everything
is moving along according to plan. That
everything is blessed,
profoundly blessed. Um and yet in the
world of becoming the world of
incompleteness
uh we have to look for the blessedness
because the world of incompleteness just
slaps us in the face and says things are
not right, things are are not perfect.
And so to me these two different
distinctions refer in some ways to
something which is primary not only
historically ontologically before the
big bang but something which is primary
even within the manifestation of the big
bang. It's the primary reality which we
can we touch into when we die, but we
also can touch into it when we're alive
through special through psychedelics or
we can touch into it through
contemplative practices so that we can
actually begin to sustain a daily
consciousness of the perfection of being
even among the sadness of incompleteness
and the sadness of becoming. Um
>> I I think yeah,
>> sorry.
>> No, I do I do get I do get glimpses of
that, you know. I the more I tap into
it, the more it's there. It's sort of
this
>> Yeah.
>> upward spiral in a way, but I do
understand what you're saying there.
Yeah.
>> Yeah. And I would again I always drop
love
not as a separate aspect of existence,
but to me love is inherent within the
the concept of oneness.
Oneness in manifesting diversity
doesn't stop being one. And that which
holds
that which holds diversity in as oneness
is we would register as love. But love
is intimacy. Love is compassion. But
love is fundamentally
the recognition, the experience of
oneness even in the world of diversity.
So to me
it's all about oneness. It's
>> I love I love that because the first
thing that came to mind, it's going to
be funny is the is a complete paradox is
Murdoch's definition of love which is um
the painful recognition that something
other than yourself exists.
So, we've got we've got the paradox even
in even in that um I love that though.
Yeah. I love that the way you put that.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. And it makes a lot of sense. Yeah.
>> And the one thing I would qualify from
what you said is I think when we die and
we become we get returned to being I
don't think that's at the expense of the
individuality we have developed inside
becoming.
>> This is important.
>> Yeah. Of course, between ultimate
reality and our time space reality,
there is this infinite
in in between reality which Buddhism
calls the Bardau, the in between reality
and which different people like Michael
Newton have explored through hypnotic
regression and and that the most of the
mystical texts talk about but there many
many gradations
between time space reality and pure
reality pure being reality.
But to me, it's not that our
individuality is sharp, is is softened.
It's that our individuality,
which is a hard one accomplishment in
the evolutionary saga, that our
individuality
becomes
transparent to or more attuned to the
other truth of the interconnectedness of
all being. But ironically that doesn't
lead to an extinction of individuality.
If anything it leads to a sharpening of
individuality. You know in chaos theory
they talk about autopoetic structures.
And autopoetic structures ironically
become stronger when they incorporate
more of the communal nature of reality.
So Chicago is a city, but it's dependent
upon a widpread
uh network of farmers and people that
live outside the city. And these goods
are constantly transporting into the
city and they fuel the identity of the
city. But if you shrank the web that
makes the network that makes Chicago
possible, Chicago would be shrunk. Uh
and it's like that with with
individuality that the more we open to
the breath of the interconnectedness
that makes up our individuality,
the more our individuality is
strengthened,
>> not diluted and not softened. And this
is where I I disagree with vidanta
because in vidanta the goal is to
extinguish individuality. The drop goes
back to the ocean. It no longer ceases
to exist as a drop. I don't think that's
an accurate view of reality. I think
it's a symptom of a stage of our
spiritual progression
>> that when we when we open to being, we
are infused with the reality of being,
the joy of being, but looking deeper at
the evolutionary project. We want to
take develop our individuality so
strongly diamond hard that you can bring
it back into the fullness of being and
become completely transparent to the
flow of being
without extinguishing individuality and
that takes an extremely defined very
very strong sense of individuality which
is not developed in one lifetime I think
it's developed over thousands of lif
lifetime. So that the buffer the the BTO
is actually a symptom of the ex the long
training that it takes before we can
achieve that quality of being which I
think Monroe points to when he talks
about the energy the energetic quality
the radiance of a graduate of the Earth
school.
I my heart is just opening when you talk
about this like it really really
resonates.
>> Um
is this
do you think this is um given that level
of gravity or weight in
any perennial tradition or is this
something that you feel is an evolution
of those things?
Like I I don't I don't recognize it as
you talk about it. I don't recognize I I
see I see it in my own discoveries, but
I don't recognize it in the greats. You
know,
>> I want to be careful because there's so
much alive in the perennial tradition
that I'm not immediately aware of. So
I'm only aware of sort of the overview
treatments.
>> It's a horrible generalization. I take I
mean there is no you know so many
thousands of
>> the perennial tradition is something
which kind of comes into existence with
the religions that were born in the
axial age. So that's it it's kind of in
the axial age we have all the major
religions in the world today not
necessarily the indigenous or native
traditions uh but the ones born in the
last 3 4 thousand years thousand years
and they have certain qualities actually
which emphasize
differentiation different political
structures different ecclesiastical
structures and yet there is this
recurring theme of the perennial
tradition. Now my own personal sense is
that all the religions of that era are
basically in advanced old age. They are
no longer have the vitality that they
did in their early stages when they were
actually solving some of the fundamental
problems of existence. Now they've
achieving us they've they've
accomplished great things. They've given
great gifts to humanity. They've taken
us from uh the potter familas of the
Roman Empire where the father could kill
his children. No one would ask questions
to uh the the Constitution of the United
States where all men are created equal.
That's a radical evolutionary
development. But basically they all have
certain fundamental limitations,
structural flaws. I mentioned two the
perennial lies. They're more
but I think they basically are coming to
the end of their sojourn. They're coming
to the end of their vitality period. And
there is a restlessness, a seeking for
something larger, seeking for something
stronger. Science basically has exploded
our understanding of the universe that
we're living in that it's exploded it so
profoundly, it's essentially shattered
the gods of the axial age. Mh.
>> And in that process, it's created a
window for us to begin to ask questions
that that are inadequately answered in
the religions of the axial age. And that
means inadequately answered in the
perennial philosophy. It's not that the
perennial philosophy doesn't speak deep
truths, but they're not complete truths.
They're not they don't take us all the
way home, so to speak. We can add to
that a deeper understanding. So that I
think one of the things we are adding is
an understanding of the role of
evolution and I when I say evolution I
don't refer to the theory of how to
explain progressive development but the
general pattern of progressive
complexification
so on and so forth.
I think that those are inadequately
addressed in the perennial tradition now
that we're beginning to understand how
old the universe is, how big it is, the
the the complex
conditions that needed to be present in
the first picosconds of existence in
order for the universe to have unfolded
as successfully as it has unfolded.
We are we are now striving to put
together an understanding of this
process
which is larger even than the perennial
traditions larger than that. And I think
psychedelics have a role to play because
psychedelics allow our mind to open
kind of more quickly than we would just
with evolution alone. And our mind can
open. And the mind that is opening is a
mind that has been nourished not just by
the religions of the past but the
science of the present. So we bring to
it a scientific understanding of the
world and we bring to it a spiritual
understanding of the greatest mystical
traditions which now we have access to
because of communication and internet
and you know the transmigration of
peoples through the through the globe.
Now we're coming into this profound
opportunity to grow an understanding
which is many levels beyond any
understanding that we've ever had in
history before.
That's the challenge and that's why I
think the women's movement is so
critically important at so many levels
because they
the we have been excluding half of the
human race and our understanding of
what's real, what's valuable and that's
why the understanding the valuing of
nature and the ecological themes of the
modern mind. We have been excluding
nature physical nature from our
spiritual understanding of the purpose
of existence. Once we include that then
we have the possibility of an
envisioning a an embodied spirituality
not simply in a short-term sense but in
a massive evolutionary sense that
spirituality is an and is an experience
is an embodied development. And the more
spirituality is embodied, the more it
generates opportunities of life
experience that transcend anything that
we've seen before. Once again, maybe
with the exceptions of the great
spiritual masters, the Mahasidius of
history, but now we're looking at a
species evolutionary development.
We're being asked to stretch our minds.
We're being asked to sort of envision
possibilities
uh that previously were pretty hard to
imagine.
Oh, your mic's on. Uh your mic's off.
>> I'm sorry. Can you hear me, Chris?
>> Yeah. I had I had the uh trash truck in
the background, so I turned it off
immediately. But
>> yeah. Um, so I I just want to make
reference very quickly to um uh to the
the mission of Spir, our community,
because we accidentally got here, but
our our mission is to explore and
advance rational, coherent, and
lifeaffirming post-materialist
worldviews.
Today's materialist worldviews
increasingly struggle to account for
higher order realities and profound
human experiences of meaning and
purpose. They've become a constraint on
our collective evolution. A more
integrated understanding of reality is
essential if humanity is to successfully
face the challenges ahead. So I think
what you're talking to talks
specifically to the mission of the
community.
>> Exactly. Yeah.
>> We're building here. So it is music to
my ears.
>> Yeah.
>> Um
>> Yeah. And the very existence of your
organization is a symptom that's
bubbling up underneath people in all
continents. a desire to understand more
and to to be able to understand more
than we've ever understood before.
>> Yes. Yeah. Yeah. Um
so my mind goes to a couple of things.
Um, one is
the if we think about the evolution that
you're talking about, it's it's it's
quite a um it's quite a limited number
of people in the world that would be at
the spear, the tip of the spear here
because if you look at the population of
the world, like the vast majority are
just trying to get by, put food on their
table, um, you know, feed their family.
Uh, and then you know that's that's the
80 8020 order. And then the next the
next bit might just be sort of learning
a little bit of self-awareness and then
as you go up there's probably very few
that have the luxury to think about what
we've thought about in our lifetimes or
access to what we've
>> had access to. So to me it brings up two
two questions. Um, one is sort of what
does that mean for the vast majority of
souls to be um to to not necessarily
have access to awakening, let alone
psychedelics.
Um, uh, and that's probably a horrible
generalization to say, and I don't mean
to make that generalization, but I just
want to call out that that problem way.
And then the other aspect of it is
>> sort of um like there's a lot of work to
be done you know and and it seems almost
overwhelmingly um
in out of balance in terms of those that
understand the work the work to be done
and those that
>> um that are have the ability to do the
work. Um,
>> and so yeah, just I think and then the
second question before I forget about it
is more around our concept of like
identity and what we are and and what
we're being forced to face in this new
new evolution of AI and technology and
all the rest. But before we get on that,
maybe I can ask you okay on the first
one. pull that question and on the other
that's that's
a really important question because only
by looking at that question seriously
can we even have any hope of trying to
avoid the charge of elitism and
developing a very subtle philosophy of
life which has very little impact or
relevance to the vast majority of
humanity
>> how do we understand that And because
I'm an educator, the first thing that
pops into my mind is education.
And we know that there are many, many
more people in grammar school than there
are doing graduate work. And the vast
majority of humanity is operating as you
say that trying to put a meal on the
table. Not to say that putting a meal on
the table can't be high spiritual and
engage high spiritual work, but it's
it's kind of more basic in that sense. U
but I don't think that should be an
impediment,
a theoretical impediment. It's a
practical impediment. And I think if we
if we look at the people who are working
at a at a higher
spiritual level or reflective level, I
think the best of them are trying to
work for the uplifting of the the
majority. The they're trying to work for
the the good of the whole. And u
excuse me one second. I've got a
technology collapse here. Okay.
>> I thought it was an animal.
Well, I have an animal in the room, but
this was my fault.
And I think um it's because
when we awaken to being, when we awaken
to the fundamental oneness of life, it
naturally opens into compassion. And
when we look at the world through the
compassion of spiritual awakening, we
are overwhelmed by the pain and
suffering and limitations of the world.
And if we're worth our salt, we want to
do something about that. And so genuine
spiritual awakening doesn't lead to
soypism or some kind of isolationist
spiritual enjoyment. It leads to work in
the world. And if it doesn't lead to
work in the world, something's wrong.
>> Yes.
>> So and and at the same time, let me make
a suggestion.
Our
conversation
has a certain psychic energy
and this psychic energy once it's
actualized in any form
it continues to exist in the world of
ideas in the world of thought thought
forms and that means our conversation
lives within the collective unconscious
of humanity forever.
Likewise, the spiritual realization
of even a small number of people
lives within the collective psyche long
after that individual has died and gone
on. And this is this is really kind of
was driven home to me very strongly in
some session work. It's kind of like
the human family because I am a human
being. Anything I experience in my
psychedelic work or anything I
experience in life doesn't simply belong
to me personally. It does. I take it
with me as I go, wherever I go. But it
also belongs to the human family and it
becomes available within the field of
the human family. Just as anger,
viciousness, you know, all the nasty
emotions run in the human family, so
does the depth of our insights and
compassion run within the human family.
And they open doors. I think that when
we are pressing through the boundaries
of consciousness, it's like the the
diamond tip of a spear that breaks
through levels of tremendous resistance.
And as it opens cracks into higher
levels of light and grace, it o opens
possibilities for that light to enter
more deeply, not simply into my personal
soul, but within the soul of the human
family. So when we do very deep
spiritual work whether it's
contemplation or meditation or
psychedelic work
we are actually creating holes within
the field of human consciousness that
allows more access of higher energies
beyond human consciousness to enter into
and to uplift human consciousness. So
there's work to be done in the physical
world. there's pragmatic work to be done
to uplift and if that's missing then
something's wrong in our spiritual
practice. There's also the recognition I
think that what we do even on the
cushion has an immediate impact though
distributed and hard to calculate
u on the well-being of the human family.
Just as when we do our work, if we are
able to offload some of the pain and
suffering directly out of the out of the
the metacoic systems that are alive
within the human the collective
unconscious that has a lightning effect
on the human family as a whole.
>> So it's it's a bothand situation, isn't
it? It's both the direct impact of our
spiritual practice and then the
pragmatic actualization of our spiritual
practice as best we can on the social
structures that were part of.
>> It is really helpful to think about it
not in terms of a nominal ratio of you
know awakened beings but rather the the
over oversized impact that a small
amount of people might have through a
collective field
>> or something along those lines. That's a
really
>> because I do I do in my gut feel that
that is the case. I mean you and it's
it's it's evidenced again and again when
you live that way you know in the
circles around you and how life and
reality manifests around you.
>> Yeah.
>> Sheldrake's insights and morphagenetic
fields. Those those fields operate at
all sorts of levels.
>> Yeah.
>> So everything that we do creates
>> energy which allows things to happen
that might not otherwise have happened.
Yes. Uh I I suspect that um
something's going on in the world right
now where
>> at a at a um at a collective level,
we're going to be forced with a
reckoning with a with a uh a looking in
the mirror and a questioning of
identity. And I think the um
>> the catalyst for this appears to me to
be AI. Um because what AI has done has
>> it's forced us to confront the reality
that we can't identify ourselves through
intelligence and intelligence isn't what
makes us special.
>> Yeah.
>> And we see like a lot of um questions,
you know, is AI conscious um and all
that sort of thing. And and I think
that's sort of the wrong question
because well, one, we're never going to
know unless we have the subjective
experience of coming back with an AI and
having a conscious experience. But um
other than that it's a red herring
because I think what the question
is AI conscious is actually is actually
forcing us to do as a species is to
reflect about how little we understand
about what consciousness is. how some of
the priors that we have like
particularly materialism as a prior um
maybe even some of these eastern
traditions as you mentioned you know
that are coming to the end of their
useful life as a prior like rel
relationality or all of this stuff like
our own participatory involvement in
creation in creating reality
>> like these are the questions that
I think the average person just won't
ask but AI coming into play will force a
lot more
um a lot more uh a larger cohort of
people to begin asking.
>> Yeah.
>> Um because you know this is and this is
happening quickly like this is sort of
the the speed of this is
>> I can't get my arms around it. I just
see it
>> blistering through, you know, the
>> public discourse and discussion and,
>> you know, I feel like it's going to be a
forcing function that comes at some
point and just forces us to stop and
reflect and say, okay, what does it mean
to be human?
Um, and
>> yeah,
>> yeah, I mean, I don't know where we go
from there, but it seems to be
happening. Yeah,
you know, I'm just at the very early
stages of thinking about these things.
Uh, I've tried to avoid AI as much as
possible in terms of absorbing it as a
civilization and I I read some of the
overview accounts of how soon it'll take
us to get to general AI and what the
impact of that will be and I share some
of the concerns of uh the worriers of
that. Uh but I also share your gut
instinct that one of the things AI will
teach us is um what is distinct about
the human experience of consciousness.
Um and that we are that we are much more
than the calculating capacity of our
mind and AI is based is built on the
calculating capacity of our mind. But
Fred Frederrico Fagan I think is makes a
point very very clearly and beautifully
that um
those calculating machines cannot be
conscious. They actually came from our
consciousness
and they are not themselves conscious as
human beings are consciousness.
And uh that they they can think faster
than we can think and they can calculate
faster and wider and they can synthesize
more data than than our minds can can
calculate and synthesize.
But they leave untouched
some of the distinct qualities of human
experience uh in our sensuality,
in our feelings, but also into the
depths with which we can tap into levels
of awareness far beyond our physical
body and far far beyond our calculating
mind. And this the me the metaphysical
the excuse me the the contemplative
mystical traditions have taught us that
when one meditates one in a sense turns
off learns how to turn off the
calculating functions of our minds.
>> And as we begin to experience
the nature of consciousness as it is in
and of itself. And then when we do that,
we can sink deeper and deeper into
levels of consciousness which eventually
transcend anything that could be
explained in terms of our personal
history. And we begin to drop into the
evolutionary layers of consciousness,
into the species layers of
consciousness, and eventually into the
mind of the universe itself.
AI can maybe calculate things that we
say about those things but AI I don't
think can experience
the great depth of consciousness that
emerges and therefore cannot experience
the kind of creativity or the nurturance
or existential
reassurance or existential insights that
emerge
from our from the taproot of our
consciousness into the universe itself.
But as I say, I'm I'm naive on AI. I'm
deal only with secondhand information
from people who are working there. Uh
but I think it it will for those who are
reflective and attentive to it, it will
teach us the difference between our
calculating capacity and our deeper
distinctly human capacities underneath
that. Um, one more question that comes
out of this because you've mentioned uh
people like Rupert Sheldrake and
Federico Ven and um these are guys that
uh
um are sort of in their own ways
uh seeking sort of scientific validation
of in a sense their own awakening
experiences. Um and there are host host
of them. I'd say I call them almost a
dream team because they're they're
they're at that cutting edge of the ven
diagram overlap, you know, scienceuality
and they're kind of pushing the frontier
and for that reason they've been labeled
heretics by that by the you know the the
redist sort of materialist fringe
>> which is becoming I think more and more
a minority thankfully.
Um, have you ever thought I'm curious
whether you've ever thought about um
bringing more people on board from from
those walks of life to like other than
diorizing your experiences, have you
seen any any value in attempting to like
link your findings in your journey to
frontier science or discoveries?
>> Um, yeah.
>> Like have you have you gone down that
path?
>> Only to a limited degree. I mean, I I
love to
read them and absorb and I appreciate
not having the expertise that they do,
but I appreciate the conclusions that
they draw, which resonate with my own
experiences.
uh and while I was teaching I was always
drawing on these people, drawing them
into the classes to show my students
that science was evolving far beyond the
reductive materialist scientists that
they were being taught in their their
classes. Uh but partly it's partly it's
because I'm older. I'm 76 now and partly
it's because
uh I'm no longer teaching at a
university.
But I have generally tended to
um contract my field of attention
away from the theory aspect and away
from the people who are doing important
cutting edge work at the at the at
theoretical levels and have focused more
on the experiential aspect because I
find
to me the most fundamental question.
I'm amazed at how how many insights that
they get on the basis of insight and
even one or or two spiritual
experiences. I mean for Fedrico Fagan
speaks very powerfully of his one
>> one yeah
>> breakthrough experience and he's
unfolded that just dramatically
>> and uh Rupert Sheldrake of course his
work began when he was in India uh in a
in an ashram and combining deep
contemplative practice with psychedelics
which gave him his first breakthrough
experience which he then developed more
and more.
So to me I find that
having pursued a lifetime pushing the
experiential boundaries
that it has taken me places which are
so unusual and semi-unique
that while there are correlations with
scientific thinkers
um I don't find myself as nourishing by
them now as I did in the years when I
was doing this work. Because when the
years I was doing this work, it was it
looking at their work and internalizing
their work told me that I was on a
reliable course because there was a
strong correlation with my experiences.
But eventually my experiences took me so
far
that I began to
pay more attention to the people who are
writing out of a deeply experiential
basis. So that even now one of the first
questions I bring when I'm looking at
someone is what is the nature what is
the range of their experience? What
range of experience are they writing out
of?
uh not that that's a limiting conditions
because many people have expanded their
their experiential starting point with
insights of a theoretical nature.
But what interests me most is the depth
of human experience that people have
realized
uh and are there correlations with those
experiences and what I've experienced so
that I tend to sort of
uh
again I I want to avoid the fallacy of
the generalization of expertise and I
know that deep experiences do not
qualify me to offer commentary on
scientific
concepts because I don't control that
that body of data except as a lay
person. Uh
but there is something
I guess I I feel myself as I age paying
more attention to
extracting
and absorbing
the depth of experiences that I've
already been subject to
than trying to
demonstrate their legitimacy. Y by
drawing correlations with developments
in science. I'm I'm supported. I'm
encouraged by those developments, but
they feel to a large degree like someone
else's work. And I'm happy for them, but
it's someone else's work. My work seems
to be different.
>> Yeah. Yeah. I love that. I'm I'm uh
drawn to
and we see that we see a common thread
across most people that have the depth
of experience you're talking about
wherein they say that um really the
highest form of expression um of any of
any um concept of nature of reality is
poetry or art and even like I've heard
the likes of you know Bernardo Castroo
talk about how art is where he goes to
to to really get in touch you know with
um
>> with the divine and and and Federico and
and Rbert Sheldre no doubt have similar
views on that. Um and then the other
thing that comes to mind is your I'll
say it so you don't have to but your uh
your quote that um in your book along
the lines of you know all the religion
religions are basically like children's
books and I and I would say you probably
probably do have to extend that to
scientific theories as well right I mean
>> well I think that scientific theories
are the new religion
>> so they're cutting they're cutting edge
and they're pushing questions that the
older religions might have pressed at a
particular point in time, but now
they're able to do it with with a v ri v
ri v ri v ri v ri v ri v ri v ri v ri v
ri v ri v ri vigor and of course the
deepest dimensions of science have
transcended the materialism of 19th
century science uh and that puts us into
a new territory and I'm very excited at
where that territory is is extending
>> but I feel like it's more their work
than mine partly just because you know
we only have so many years we only have
so much time and much of this work was
done my work was done when I was 30 to
>> and I've been reflecting on it from 50
to 75 you know and so
>> right now I'm kind of at the last stages
of distillation of that work um yeah
>> yeah it's really interesting to
contemplate like um
yeah
>> yeah Yeah, I I I I like to think of
this evolution
as obviously as transcendent include in
the sense of
>> you know we don't leave things behind
but rather we we incorporate and
transcend them and
>> it's been my my view on
>> the scientific endeavor. Um but at the
same time there is still something
missing from looking at it from within
in that sense like looking at it from
within the constructs of um of science
which um
>> um which may also change as well in this
new world that we're facing.
Let me introduce an idea that might draw
together some of the themes that you've
been talking we've talked about from
suffering
the cutting edge ideas in science you
know and this is this is the concept of
the diamond soul I'd like to bring it in
at this point it might crystallize some
things
>> u and it has to do with the question of
reincarnation and where reincarnation is
taking humanity And I want to begin by
saying there's so much about
reincarnation we don't know. We don't
know the physics of reincarnation. We
don't know how this consciousness which
I'll call the soul comes and goes from
the body. We don't know how all the
learning that we've acquired in this
lifetime
separates from the body and maintains
its integrity
sufficiently so that aspects of it can
encode in a new body. We don't know how
soul learning encodes in the genetic
matrix of a new body. So much that we
don't understand. But some of it we do
understand. We do understand some of the
principles
that our consciousness predates
our body that we have an awareness that
we can often trace back and we can find
the roots of that awareness in lives
that predate our physical incarnation in
this lifetime. And therefore it gives us
an understanding that our learning from
this lifetime will influence similarly
lifetimes subsequent to this body. So
that essentially we have sufficient
understanding to know that our
consciousness is the result of many many
lifetimes feeding into it and is not
exhausted in this body and does not get
become extinguished when this body is
extinguished. But then that opens the
question, well, where is this infinitely
open-ended progression of more and more
time? It's all about time. We're getting
more and more time, more and more
experience. Where is it leading to us?
Classically, in many of the eastern
traditions, the basic ideas, it leads us
to eventually awakening spiritually.
That means awakening to the point where
we experience that underneath our
idiosyncratic layers of consciousness
at the very center of our being is a
consciousness which is universal and
includes all of reality. So atman the
essence of the individual is Brahman the
essence of the totality that is the
spiritual awakening classically that um
as the shaman says all my relations
looks at the world of all of my
relations the profound feeling of of
kinship uh with all existence
and classically this been interpreted to
mean once you achieve that state you
also achieve escape velocity so that
when you die, you no longer have to
reincarnate again. And so that most of
these axial age traditions at the
collect at the popular level, not
necessarily at the most refined esoteric
level, but they think of reincarnation
culminating in a spiritual development
which leads to off-planet realization in
the pure land or in the garden or in
heaven that we achieve an escape
velocity. We no longer have to come back
to earth. Which of course leaves the
question of what was the purpose of
earth unanswered in the beginning. If
the whole purpose is to escape, why
existence? Why the physical world? It's
just a you know
and so in that context I want to refer
to a series of experiences that I had in
my psychedelic work
in which in one particular day I began
to experience all my farmer lives coming
into me very quickly. It it was like
wrapping a filament of of light like a
string of light around a kite spool.
And at some point they seem to hit a
critical mass and they fused. All of
those individual life life experiences
fused into a single consciousness.
And when that happened, there was a
tremendous explosion of energy from my
heart. And the diamond light just
exploded from my heart. And I was
projected into a state of awareness
where I was an individual, but I was an
individual be beyond any frame of
reference that I had ever imagined
before. I was beyond Chris Bash, but I
was an individual. And Chris Bash was
just a thread within this larger
consciousness. And with that came a
variety of teachings
which if you unpack them, it led me to
believe that this is a a more accurate
description of where humanity is take
where reincarnation is taking all of us
because all of us reincarnate. There's
no exceptions to the rule. Uh so what
one person experiences deeply can be
symptomatic of a larger developmental
process with the species and that is in
the normal course of reincarnation you
forget your previous lives and that
forgetting is important because it adds
the discontinuity which allows variety.
So 100 years as a woman, 100 years as a
man, 100 years as a soldier, 100 years
as a farmer, so on so forth. All this
variety is enormously important to
accelerating the evolutionary experience
of refining consciousness, developing
consciousness.
And so we take the forgetfulness as an
inherent feature of reincarnation, but
it's really an inherent feature of a
certain stage of the reincarnation
process. And I think we are coming to a
point in the story where that stage is
being transcending into a new stage
where the story is the collecting of our
former lives integrating more and more
of our past life histories into our
present consciousness.
And eventually, first this requires
healing our former lives because they
come to us with a lot of unfinished
business, a lot of hurts and bruises.
And we heal them in a therapeutic
process perhaps, but we also are summing
their virtues, summing their qualities,
summoning summing their talents.
I think we are entering a point in
history where
this progression that I experienced
individually is happening underneath our
feet. That we are in a sense growing
into the birth of a soul awareness that
supplants and eventually kind of
displaces egoic awareness. that we are
growing into a point where we know
ourselves to be
souls that do not die and have been
living for tens of thousands, hundreds
of thousands of years. And the soul
consciousness awakens inside our body
and with that awakening, it's such a
profound transition that it literally
constitutes a new form of humanity.
Previously we have seen individuals
go through this process and that's how I
understand the great teachers of
history, spiritual teachers of Jesus,
the Muhammad, the Buddha. But now we're
looking at the possibility the pro the
inevitability I would say of the entire
species going through this
transformation because we're coming into
a crisis and it's not only AI that's
fermenting a crisis in self-standing.
It's also
the governance of our planet
>> made being governed from the position of
ego which is a fragmented self-awareness
which leads to a discontinuity which
leads to being able to benefit one's
individual existence at the expense of
other people's existence and think that
somehow we we come out ahead of that
game. uh to non-inclusive solutions to
non-inclusive
considerations of social equity and so
on so forth and um we're creating
ecological devastation.
>> Yes.
>> Which is going to radically impose and
compromise the lives of future
generations. So we're paying attention
to the present not to the future. Paying
attention to the self, not to the other.
And we're generating problems which are
about to come cascading into us uh in
the form of ecological a cascading
series of ecological crisis, force
migration, eco migration, the profound
inequality of our financial and social
systems is you know the whole system is
coming in. We're entering the time of
the poly crisis and I think the pain of
that crisis
is going to open us up to a level of
human suffering
that is going to precipitate a profound
transformation of the human heart. And
part of that transformation I think is
is the summation
drawing upon resources which have been
latent within our history but are now
being actualized into a higher form of
self-expression. I think the poly crisis
is giving birth to a new
political structure, a new cultural
structure on the planet, a more
integrated, unified structure. But it's
also giving birth to a more unified
individual
structure within our individual
consciousness. And this is what I would
call the birth of the diamond soul. The
structure, the nature of the future
human is the diamond soul, which is to
say our soul consciousness fully
embodied in our body. Right? I don't
know how this all plays out. I don't
know the details of of the the timetable
or the details of the how these poly
crisis inflict themselves or how AI
factors into the process. But I have
been given the experience, the visionary
experience of seeing humanity entering a
profound global crisis, going through
this crisis and being profoundly changed
by this crisis. And also the insight
that this is going to be happening
faster than we would ever have predicted
on earlier
systems of thought that we are entering
a nonlinear period of history, a
nonlinear condition within the
collective psyche
in which accelerated change can take
place much faster than it ever would
have taken place in linear conditions of
ordinary uh reality.
So I I I think that we are at a pivot
point in human history. We either go
forward or we go extinct. And extinction
is a tremendous motivator. And I think
we're going forward. I think we're at a
a particular time. And the essence of
that forward movement, I think, is
taking responsibility
for the pains created
by a humanity that was operating at a
lower level of functioning. egoic level
of functioning and simultaneously
opening to the opportunities that are
created when humanity awakens and and
chooses the responsibilities of the soul
which is a much broader entity, a much
older entity, a much more much entering
into an entity that has a much more
natural communion with the creative
intelligence of the universe than the
ego does.
So, I I'll stop there.
>> Oh, it's it's actually frankly exciting
to think about.
>> It is exciting.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Despite all the volatility
that's that's that's to come in that
vision.
>> Um
>> Yeah.
>> There's a lot there to be
>> to be looking forward to. And
>> yeah, the amount of work to be done
sometimes feels overwhelming. It does,
but it's exciting and overwhelming in
the way that labor is for a woman who's
being pregnant for nine months.
>> It is a very intense day, a potentially
dangerous day, a ve of very, very hard
work. But if all goes well, at the end
of it, we hold a new life that wasn't
there before.
>> And I think this is true for humanity.
All of those correlate. We are giving
birth to a new form of human
consciousness on the planet, not just
with individuals, for the entire
species.
>> That's what my visionary experiences
have have led me to believe.
>> Chris, I couldn't think of a better way
to bring the threads together. and um
and you've left me with so many just
nuggets of gold, diamond nuggets to to
sit and contemplate with as as always as
you do, which is why I love asking you
these questions. Um, and yeah, we we we
won't have an answer to the impossible
question, but by by fleshing out, you
know, your experiences and and your and
your visions and and all of our own
individual journeys where I think we're
surfacing we're surfacing a closer
relationship with with the divine at a
collective level. I hope anyway. And um
I certainly see it in my circles and
things that transparent transpire in my
life and I can only imagine the amount
of lives that you've touched. um through
the work that you've done. So absolutely
openhearted gratitude for you as not
just the explorer and you know OG
psychonaut that you are but just as a
beautiful man, beautiful human being
that you are. So thank you. You know,
thank you, Michael, and thank you for
the conversations that we're having and
the conversations that you have with
other people because these conversations
live on not just even through the the
the internet, but they live on uh in the
consciousness of humanity. It's
important for us to have these type of
challenging conversations because these
conversations are catalyst that operate
on many levels far beyond the levels
that we are aware of and even the levels
that we're are aware of they have a
profound catalytic impact.
>> So thank you very much for your work.
>> That's a special takeaway for me Chris.
Yeah, I'm going to sit with that one.
Thank you.